- Authentication is not an easy operation
when it comes to modern software.
On paper, it looks very straightforward.
User comes to your site, enters their username
and password, and clicks submit.
You then evaluate the username and password
and determine if this is indeed the correct person
and go from there.
Simple, right?
Well, not so fast.
Authentication itself has many security implications.
One such attack is an enumeration attack,
which we've already discussed.
If you provide separate messages
when a wrong password is entered,
versus when an unknown user enters your system,
you are telling an attacker if they have
the username correct or not.
So, the key here is keep the messaging consistent.
Another issue to address is the actual time
it takes to perform authentication.
This is a case where faster is not better.
We're going to talk about cryptographic algorithms
in a bit, but know that some hashing algorithms
are slower than others, and when it
comes to authentication, slow is not a bad thing.
Now, when I say slow, we're talking about hundreds
of milliseconds slower, not seconds or minutes.
The reason for this is because a faster algorithm
gives an attacker more operations
per unit of time to brute force a password,
so the key here is use a good password hashing algorithm.
Another issue that just makes the previous two worse
is simply allowing password brute force attacks.
If you do not provide a maximum number
of bad password attempts before
you institute a lockout procedure,
you're setting your site up to be attacked.
Not only will this put your customer data at risk,
but you will also be allowing more load
on your system than you even should be.
The key, here, is having a maximum number
of incorrect attempts and storing
those failed attempts in a database.
Storing this data in a session is not sufficient.
So, I want to point out a couple other issues really quickly,
because in all honesty, we could go on for days.
Never stores your customer's password,
encrypted, or worse yet, in plain text.
You have zero reason to know, or be able
to identify a customer's password.
If you can do so, an attacker can as well,
if they gain access, so only hash passwords.
Also, leverage short-lived
unique links for passwords resets.
Password reset functionality should provide unique tokens
to customers through their verified email address.
You should never provide them
a password in a plain text email.
You should also never allow anyone from your company
to manipulate their passwords or impersonate the customer.
Also, like before, consider how you respond
to password changes on screen.
If you know the user, is the messaging the same,
or different, than if you don't know them?
A final point that I want to bring up about authentication
and passwords is consider the complexity.
You would be better served to only use lowercase letters
in a password of sufficient size,
than a short password with complex rules.
The first is easier for the user to memorize,
while the latter is next to impossible.
While I won't argue that special characters
and uppercase letters add to the search space,
I will state that an all lowercase, 29 character,
dictionary word based password would currently
take over a trillion years to crack randomly.
An eight character password, with symbols,
numbers, and mixed case, can take minutes to guess.
Authentication issues can arise
if you don't take this topic seriously,
which, believe it or not, can be the case.
I urge you to really think about authentication
and passwords the next time you interact
with that part of your system.